[TT-16831] docs: add OpenTelemetry metrics pages and restructure metrics section (#1808)
TykTechnologies/tyk-docs: api-management/traces/datadog.mdx

---
title: "Send Tyk Traces to Datadog"
description: "Step-by-step guide to connect Tyk Gateway distributed traces to Datadog using the OpenTelemetry Collector."
keywords: "Distributed Tracing, Datadog, OpenTelemetry, OTLP, OTel Collector, Tyk Gateway, APM, Observability"
sidebarTitle: "Datadog"
---

> This guide explains how to configure Tyk API Gateway and the OpenTelemetry Collector to collect distributed traces in Datadog. It follows the reference documentation from [Datadog](https://docs.datadoghq.com/opentelemetry/otel_collector_datadog_exporter/?tab=onahost).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide explains how to set up Datadog to ingest OpenTelemetry traces via the OpenTelemetry Collector (OTel Collector) using Docker. It follows the reference documentation from [Datadog](https://docs.datadoghq.com/opentelemetry/otel_collector_datadog_exporter/?tab=onahost).
```

While this tutorial demonstrates using an OpenTelemetry Collector running in Docker, the core concepts remain consistent regardless of how and where the OpenTelemetry collector is deployed.

## Prerequisites

- [Docker installed on your machine](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/)
- Tyk Gateway v5.2.0 or higher
- OpenTelemetry Collector Contrib [docker image](https://hub.docker.com/r/otel/opentelemetry-collector-contrib). Make sure to use the Contrib distribution of the OpenTelemetry Collector as it is required for the [Datadog exporter](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/exporter/datadogexporter). 

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- An [API key from Datadog](https://docs.datadoghq.com/account_management/api-app-keys/#add-an-api-key-or-client-token). For example, `6c35dacbf2e16aa8cda85a58d9015c3c`. 
- Your [Datadog site](https://docs.datadoghq.com/getting_started/site/#access-the-datadog-site). Examples are: `datadoghq.com`, `us3.datadoghq.com` and `datadoghq.eu`. 
- 

```

Reviewer 2: This prerequisite is already there, ignoring this suggestion.

Reviewer: Something weird happened when I was trying to apply changes earlier - it seemed to apply them but then leave the suggestion open at the same time. 🤷

## Instructions

### Step 1. Configure the OpenTelemetry Collector

>     You will need:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Should be in the pre-requisites section!

>     - An [API key from Datadog](https://docs.datadoghq.com/account_management/api-app-keys/#add-an-api-key-or-client-token). For example, `6c35dacbf2e16aa8cda85a58d9015c3c`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

>     - Your [Datadog site](https://docs.datadoghq.com/getting_started/site/#access-the-datadog-site). Examples are: `datadoghq.com`, `us3.datadoghq.com` and `datadoghq.eu`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

      otel-collector:
        image: otel/opentelemetry-collector-contrib:latest
        volumes:
          - ./otel-collector.yml:/etc/otel-collector.yml
        command: ["--config=/etc/otel-collector.yml"]
        ports:
          - "4317" # OTLP gRPC receiver
        networks:
          - tyk
      
      # Tyk API Gateway, open-source deployment
      tyk:
        image: tykio/tyk-gateway:v5.2
        ports:
          - 8080:8080
        environment:
          - TYK_GW_OPENTELEMETRY_ENABLED=true
          - TYK_GW_OPENTELEMETRY_EXPORTER=grpc
          - TYK_GW_OPENTELEMETRY_ENDPOINT=otel-collector:4317
        volumes:
          - ./apps:/opt/tyk-gateway/apps
        depends_on:
          - redis
        networks:
          - tyk

      redis:
        image: redis:4.0-alpine
        ports:
          - 6379:6379
        command: redis-server --appendonly yes
        networks:
          - tyk

    networks:
      tyk:
    ```

    To start the services, go to the directory that contains the docker-compose.yml file and run the following command:

    ```bash
    docker-compose up
    ```

### Step 4. Explore OpenTelemetry traces in Datadog

>     Begin by sending a few requests to the API endpoint configured in step 2: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    1. Send a few requests to the API endpoint configured in step 2: 
```

    ``
    http://localhost:8080/hello-world/
    ``

>     Next, log in to Datadog and navigate to the 'APM' / 'Traces' section. Here, you should start observing traces generated by Tyk:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    2. Log in to Datadog and navigate to the **APM / Traces** section. Here, you should start observing traces generated by Tyk:
```

    <img src="/img/distributed-tracing/opentelemetry/api-gateway-trace-tyk-datadog.png" alt="Tyk API Gateway distributed trace in Datadog" />

>     Click on a trace to view all its internal spans:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    3. Click on a trace to view all its internal spans:
```

    <img src="/img/distributed-tracing/opentelemetry/api-gateway-trace-tyk-datadog-spans.png" alt="Tyk API Gateway spans in Datadog" />

>     Datadog will generate a service entry to monitor Tyk API Gateway and will automatically compute valuable metrics using the ingested traces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    4. Datadog will generate a service entry to monitor Tyk Gateway and will automatically compute valuable metrics using the ingested traces.4
```

    <img src="/img/distributed-tracing/opentelemetry/api-gateway-tyk-service-monitoring-datadog.png" alt="Tyk API Gateway service monitoring in Datadog" />

## Troubleshooting

> If you do not observe any traces appearing in Datadog, consider the following steps for resolution:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you do not see any traces from Tyk appearing in Datadog, consider the following steps for resolution:
```

> - Logging: Examine logs from Tyk API Gateway and from the OpenTelemetry Collector for any issues or warnings that might provide insights.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Logging: Examine logs from Tyk Gateway and from the OpenTelemetry Collector for any issues or warnings that might provide insights.
```

> - Data Ingestion Delays: Be patient, as there could be some delay in data ingestion. Wait for 10 seconds to see if traces eventually appear, as this is the timeout we have configured in the batch processing of the OpenTelemetry collector within step 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Data Ingestion Delays: Be patient, as there could be some delay in data ingestion. We configured a 10 second timeout in the batch processing of the OpenTelemetry collector in step 1, so give the system time to process the data.
```
